---
title: Debugging `clang` with `rr`
---

A couple of months ago, I set out to debug a tricky issue that caused crashes in `clang` [when compiling `mp-units`](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/110231).

The bug manifests as a non-deterministic stack overflow and, sometimes, false diagnostics.

The problem originated from the unexpected interaction between two components: `ASTContext::getAutoTypeInternal` and `llvm::FoldingSetBase::FindNodeOrInsertPos`.

The smallest reproducer that triggers the bug looks like this:

```cpp
template <typename>
concept C1 = true;

template <typename, auto>
concept C2 = true;

template <C1 auto V, C2<V> auto>
struct S;
```

When defining the template `S`, we use two non-type template parameters: `V` and an unnamed parameter (let's call it `X`). These parameters are stored in the `AutoTypes` member of `ASTContext`, which was originally a `llvm::ContextualFoldingSet`. During this storing process, a `FoldingSetID` is generated using various pieces of information, including the value of a pointer (to a type, IIRC). This pointer can vary between runs due to [ASLR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Address_space_layout_randomization), leading to different hash values and potentially placing `X` and `V` in the same bucket.

This situation wouldn't be problematic if `llvm::FoldingSetBase` stored the `FoldingSetID` of each entry. However, it doesn't. Instead, it recalculates the `FoldingSetID` each time it needs to compare entries. When the calculation involves an auto type, it triggers a recursive call to `ASTContext::getAutoTypeInternal`, which in turn calls (several frames after) `llvm::FoldingSetBase::FindNodeOrInsertPos` again. This recursive loop continues until it causes a stack overflow, crashing `clang`.

The tricky part of debugging this issue was its random nature, happening in only about 10% of the runs. Even with `gdb` attached, there was a chance of mis-stepping and causing the crash, requiring multiple reruns to catch another failure.

This is where [`rr`](https://rr-project.org/) came in handy. By running `rr` in a loop until a crash happened, I could consistently capture the failure. The loop looked something like this:

```bash
while true; do
    rr record ./llvm/cmake-linux-debug/bin/clang -std=c++20 crash.cpp -c
    if [ $? -ne 0 ]; then
        break;
    fi
    rr rm clang-0
done
```

Once I captured a crash, the execution was recorded! I could use `rr replay clang-0` to replay the execution as many times as needed, with the same outcome each time.

Additionally, with commands like `reverse-continue`, even if I made a mistake and caused the crash, I could jump back in time to before the function call and continue debugging as if nothing had happened.

`rr` proved to be an invaluable tool, and I regret not discovering it sooner, especially considering it has been around for over a decade.
